src/app/writing/motion-part-2/page.mdx, before:

export const metadata = {
  title: "Motion Part 2",
  description: "Guidelines on when to animate&mdash;and when not to.",
  publishedDate: "2025-05-05",
};

# Motion Part 2

An interface's feel can be influenced by animations. When executed correctly, they provide rhythm and feedback. However, if overused or poorly timed, they can make the experience feel less responsive.

Here are a few notes on animation timing and restraint, especially in the context of designing for interfaces we use every day.

## General Guidelines

Most UI animations should live between 150–300ms. This range feels quick, yet readable from a cognitive standpoint. It gives the eye just enough time to register change, without making the interface feel slow.

- 150ms for hover transitions&mdash;our focus is already on the element.
- 200ms enter / 150ms exit transitions for popovers and modals&mdash;paired with an `ease-out` or `ease-in-out` curve for natural responsiveness.
  - Tip: default to using [custom easing curves](https://gist.github.com/bendc/ac03faac0bf2aee25b49e5fd260a727d) if the built-in curve is not strong enough.
- Evaluate anything else on a case-by-case basis, depending on spatial distance, frequency of use, and emotional tone
  - For instance, a gentle fade-in for a success notification can evoke calmness, while a quick bounce can suggest energy or urgency.

As a baseline, transitions should serve the user’s mental model. They shouldn’t just move pixels&mdash;they should clarify what changed and _why_.

## When Not to Animate

Animations are not always helpful. There are cases where motion gets in the way&mdash;especially with high-frequency UI patterns.

For example, macOS menus and tools like Raycast avoid entrance animations for things like context menus or launchers. These are tools you call upon dozens of times a day. Any added delay, even 100ms, can accumulate into friction. Perceived performance _feels_ faster.

In these contexts:

- Skip entrance animations. Fade out if needed, but keep presentation instant.
- Avoid transitions between submenu items (e.g., hover states or delayed fades).
- Function over flourish. Motion should never block comprehension or speed.

As a rule of thumb: if a component appears more than a few times a day, then default to no animation. If it’s a novel moment (like a login flow or onboarding), consider using motion to enhance perception and delight.

Always be mindful of users who prefer reduced motion and respect the system preference. Provide a thoughtful default by using the `prefers-reduced-motion` media query on the web or equivalent iOS and Android APIs.

## Taste and Restraint

Animation is a tool for _storytelling_ but it requires taste&mdash;knowing when to hold back. I find that interfaces that feel “alive” usually reflect careful choices—balancing responsiveness with restraint.

Approach motion design like editing a film: just as every cut and transition in a film supports the narrative and guides the viewer’s attention, every bit of motion in an interface should support the user’s journey and serve the story.

## Resources

---

1. [Human processor model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_processor_model)
2. [Learning From Terminals to Design the Future of User Interfaces](https://brandur.org/interfaces)
3. [Executing UX Animations: Duration and Motion Characteristics](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/animation-duration)
4. [Fitts' law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fitts%27s_law)

Commit message:

Update notes and add footnotes

src/app/writing/motion-part-2/page.mdx, after:

export const metadata = {
  title: "Motion Part 2",
  description: "Notes on when to animate and when not to.",
  publishedDate: "2025-05-05",
};

# Motion Part 2

An interface's feel can be influenced by animations. When executed correctly, they provide rhythm and feedback. However, if overused or poorly timed, they can make the experience feel less responsive.

Here are a few notes on animation timing and restraint, especially in the context of designing for interfaces we use every day.

## General Guidelines

Most UI animations should live between 200–300ms.<sup className="prose-sup"><a href="#fn-1">1</a></sup> This range feels quick, yet readable from a cognitive standpoint. It gives the eye just enough time to register change, without making the interface feel slow.

- 150ms for hover transitions&mdash;our focus is already on the element.
- 200ms enter / 150ms exit transitions for popovers and modals&mdash;paired with an `ease-out` or `ease-in-out` curve for natural responsiveness.
  - Tip: default to using [custom easing curves](https://gist.github.com/bendc/ac03faac0bf2aee25b49e5fd260a727d) if the built-in curve is not strong enough.
- Evaluate anything else on a case-by-case basis, depending on spatial distance, frequency of use, and emotional tone
  - For instance, a gentle fade-in for a success notification can evoke calmness, while a quick bounce can suggest energy or urgency.

As a baseline, transitions should serve the user’s mental model. They shouldn’t just move pixels&mdash;they should clarify what changed and _why_.

## When Not to Animate

Animations are not always helpful. There are cases where motion gets in the way&mdash;especially with high-frequency UI patterns.

For example, macOS menus and tools like Raycast avoid entrance animations for things like context menus or launchers. These are tools you call upon dozens of times a day. Any added delay, even 100ms, can accumulate into friction. Perceived performance _feels_ faster.<sup className="prose-sup"><a href="#fn-2">2</a></sup>

In these contexts:

- Skip entrance animations. Fade out if needed, but keep presentation instant.
- Avoid transitions between submenu items (e.g., hover states or delayed fades).
- Function over flourish. Motion should never block comprehension or speed.<sup className="prose-sup"><a href="#fn-3">3</a></sup>

As a rule of thumb: if a component appears more than a few times a day, then default to no animation. If it’s a novel moment (like a login flow or onboarding), consider using motion to enhance perception and delight.

Always be mindful of users who prefer reduced motion and respect the system preference. Provide a thoughtful default by using the `prefers-reduced-motion` media query on the web or equivalent iOS and Android APIs.

## Taste and Restraint

Animation is a tool for _storytelling_ but it requires taste&mdash;knowing when to hold back. I find that interfaces that feel “alive” usually reflect careful choices—balancing responsiveness with restraint.

Approach motion design like editing a film: just as every cut and transition in a film supports the narrative and guides the viewer’s attention, every bit of motion in an interface should support the user’s journey and serve the story.

---

<section className="footnotes">
  <ol className="prose-lists">
    <li id="fn-1">
      The average [visual reaction time is 230
      ms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_processor_model). This indicates
      that a duration of 200-300 ms is ideal for most animations, while 100-150
      ms is effective for micro-interactions.
    </li>
    <li id="fn-2">
      Interfaces that respond instantly are often [perceived as more
      performant](https://brandur.org/interfaces), even if they aren't.
    </li>
    <li id="fn-3">
      When used sparingly, animation helps communicate state changes, reduce
      ambiguity, and reinforce intent. The key is to stay out of the way.{" "}
    </li>
  </ol>
</section>
